Java Concurrency is a term that covers multithreading, concurrency, and parallelism on the Java platform.

## What Is Multithreading ?
Multithreading means that you have multiple threads of execution inside the same application, each executing different parts of the code. CPUs are only able to execute a single thread at a time. Therefore, a single CPU will share its execution time among multiple threads, switching between executing each of the threads for a given amount of time. It is possible to have the threads of an application be executed by different CPUs.

## Why Multithreading ?
### Better Utilization Of A Single CPU
Multithreading can help better utilize the resources in the computer. For example, if one thread is waiting for the response to a request sent over the network, the other thread could use the CPU in the meantime to do something else. Additionally, if the computer has multiple CPUs, or if the CPU has multiple execution cores, then multithreading can also help your application utilize these extra CPU cores.

### Better utilization of multiple CPUs or CPU cores
Multiple threads are needed for our application to be able to utilize all the CPUs or CPU cores. A single thread can at most utilize a single CPU and sometimes not even completely utilize a single CPU.
### Better user experience with regards to responsiveness
Multithreading can provide better user experience in applications. For example, when a button is clicked in a GUI that results in a request being sent over the network, it matters which thread performs the request. Using the same thread that is updating the GUI to send the request can result in GUI "hanging" while the thread waits for the response to the request.  Instead, such a request could be performed by a background thread so that the GUI thread is free to respond to other user requests in the meantime.

### Better user experience with regards to fairness
Multithreading can help share resources of a computer more fairly among users. Imagine having a server that receives requests from clients and only has one thread to execute these requests. If a client sends a request that takes a long time to process, then all other clients' requests would have to wait until that one request has finished. Having multiple threads  execute clients' requests ensures that no single task can monopolize the CPU completely.

## Multithreading VS Multitasking

### Multitasking
Multitasking allows computers to simulate the execution of multiple programs (tasks or processes) at the same time.  The execution of multiple programs at the same time is achieved by sharing the single CPU between the programs. The operating system is in charge of switching between the programs running, executing each of them for a little while before switching.

### Multithreading
Multithreading allows for multiple threads of execution inside the same program. When you have multiple threads executing the same program, it is like having multiple CPUs execute within the same program. However, a CPU can ever only execute a single thread at a time.

## Multithreading Is Hard
Multithreading can be a great way to increase the performance of some type of programs. However, multithreading is more challenging than multitasking. The threads are executing within the same program and are hence reading and writing the same memory simultaneously. This can result in errors not seen in a single threaded program. Some of these errors may not be seen on single CPU machines, because two threads never really execute simultaneously. Multiple computers, though, come with multi core CPUs, and even with multiple CPUs too.  This means that separate threads can be executed by separate cores or CPUs simultaneously.

If a thread reads a memory location while another thread writes to it, what value will the first thread end up reading? The old value? The value written by the second thread? Or a value that is a mix between the two? Or, if two threads are writing to the same memory location simultaneously, what value will be left when they are done? The value written by the first thread? The value written by the second thread? Or a mix of the two values written?

Without proper precautions, any of these outcomes are possible. The behavior would not even be predictable. The outcome could change from time to time. Therefore it is important as a developer to know how to take the right precautions - meaning learning to control how threads access shared resources like memory, files, databases etc.