The `Java happens before guarantee` is a set of rules that govern how the Java VM and CPU is allowed to reorder instructions for performance gains. It makes it possible for threads to rely on when a variable value is synchronized to or from main memory, and which other variables have been synchronized at the same time. The Java happens before guarantee is centered around access to `volatile` variables and variables accessed from within `synchronized` blocks

# Instruction Reordering
Modern CPUs have the ability to execute instructions in parallel when the instructions do not depend on each other. For example, the following two instructions do not depend on each other, therefore they can be executed in parallel
```
a = b + c

d = e + f
```
However, the following two instructions cannot easily be executed in parallel because the second instruction depends on the result of the first instruction.
```
a = b + c
d = a + e
```

Reordering of instructions can increase parallel execution of instructions in the CPU. Increased parallelization means increased performance. 

Instruction reordering is allowed for the Java VM and the CPU as long as the semantics of the program do not change. The end result has to be the same as if the instructions were executed in the exact order they are listed in the source code.

# Instruction Reordering Problems in Multi CPU Computers
Instruction reordering poses some challenges in a multithreaded, multi CPU system.

```
public class FrameExchanger  {

    private long framesStoredCount = 0:
    private long framesTakenCount  = 0;

    private boolean hasNewFrame = false;

    private Frame frame = null;

        // called by Frame producing thread
    public void storeFrame(Frame frame) {
        this.frame = frame;
        this.framesStoredCount++;
        this.hasNewFrame = true;
    }

        // called by Frame drawing thread
    public Frame takeFrame() {
        while( !hasNewFrame) {
            //busy wait until new frame arrives
        }

        Frame newFrame = this.frame;
        this.framesTakenCount++;
        this.hasNewFrame = false;
        return newFrame;
    }

}
```
Instruction reordering could happen inside the `storeFrame()` because the instructions do not depend on each other.  However, imagine what would happen if the instructions were reordered like below
```
    public void storeFrame(Frame frame) {
        this.hasNewFrame = true;
        this.framesStoredCount++;
        this.frame = frame;
    }
```
Notice how the field `hasNewFrame` is now set to `true` before the `frame` field is assigned to reference the new Frame object. That means, that if the drawing thread is waiting in the while-loop in the `takeFrame()` method, the drawing thread could exit that while-loop, and take the old Frame object. That would result in a redrawing of an old Frame, leading to a waste of resources.

Obviously, in this particular case redrawing an old frame won't make the application crash or malfunction. It just wastes CPU and GPU resources. However, in other cases such instruction reordering could make the application malfunction.

## The Java Volatile Visibility Guarantee
The Java `volatile` keyword provides some visibility guarantees for when writes to, and reads of, volatile variables result in synchronization of the variable's value to and from main memory. The synchronization to and from main memory is what makes the value visible to other threads. 

Instruction reordering may break the volatile visibility guarantee. That is why we have the Java volatile happens before guarantee, to place some restrictions on instruction reordering.

### The Java Volatile Write Visibility Guarantee
Writing to a Java `volatile` variable will result in its updated value being written directly to main memory. Additionally, all variables visible to the thread writing to the volatile variable will also be synchronized to main memory.

To illustrate the Java volatile write visibility guarantee, look at this example:
```
this.nonVolatileVarA = 34;
this.nonVolatileVarB = new String("Text");
this.volatileVarC    = 300;
```
When the third instruction in the example above writes to the volatile variable `volatileVarC`, the values of the two non-volatile variables will also be synchronized to main memory. This is because these variables are visible to the thread when writing to the volatile variable.

### The Java Volatile Read Visibility Guarantee
When the value of a Java volatile variable is read, it is guaranteed to be read directly from main memory. Furthermore, all the variables visible to the thread reading the volatile variable will also have their values refreshed from main memory.

To illustrate the Java volatile read visibility guarantee look at this example:
```
c = other.volatileVarC;
b = other.nonVolatileB;
a = other.nonVolatileA;
```
When `other.volatileVarC` is read in from main memory, the `other.nonVolatileB` and `other.nonVolatileA` are also read in from main memory.

## The Java Volatile Happens Before Guarantee
The `Java volatile happens before guarantee` sets some restrictions on instruction reordering around volatile variables.

```
public class FrameExchanger  {

    private long framesStoredCount = 0:
    private long framesTakenCount  = 0;

    private volatile boolean hasNewFrame = false;

    private Frame frame = null;

        // called by Frame producing thread
    public void storeFrame(Frame frame) {
        this.frame = frame;
        this.framesStoredCount++;
        this.hasNewFrame = true;
    }

        // called by Frame drawing thread
    public Frame takeFrame() {
        while( !hasNewFrame) {
            //busy wait until new frame arrives
        }

        Frame newFrame = this.frame;
        this.framesTakenCount++;
        this.hasNewFrame = false;
        return newFrame;
    }

}
```