String is the most basic and common redis data type. They are binary safe sequences of bytes. You can store in them things like integers, binary values, comma-separated values, and serialized JSON. Being binary safe means that you can store larger objects, such as images, videos, documents, and sound. The maximum size that can be stored in a String is 512MB.

Redis strings are also great for implementing counters, as there is built in support for incrementing and decrementing integer and floating point values within a string. For this operations to be possible, the encoding is verified before the command execution(verify there is a number in the string).

## What are some practical uses?
They are commonly used to cache 
* API responses
* Session storage
* HTML pages

## Store and retrieve a String
* Store string: SET user:101:time-zone UTC-8
* Retrieve string: GET user:101:time-zone

## Storing JSON in a String
* Store JSON in string: SET usage:63 '{"balance": 699.99, "currency": "USD" ...}' EX 7200

## Increment and decrement an integer value within a redis String
* INCR: increment by 1
	* INCR user:credit-balance
	* Applying this to a non-existing key will create the key with value of 1
* INCRBY: increment by a certain amount
	* INCRBY user:credit-balance 20
	* applying a negative value will decrement by that amount
	* applying this to a non-existing key will create the key with the given value
* DECR: decrement value by 1
* DECRBY: decrement value by a certain value
* INCRBYFLOAT: increment float value by a certain value
